Add feature blog: introduce prefer-align-cpus-by-uncore-cache (#51484)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2025-xx-xx-prefer-align-cpus-by-uncore-cache-beta/index.md

---
layout: blog
title: 'Kubernetes v1.34: Introducing CPU Manager Static Policy Option for Uncore Cache Alignment'
date: 2025-xx-xx
draft: true
slug: kubernetes-v1-34-prefer-align-by-uncore-cache-cpumanager-static-policy-optimization
author: Charles Wong (AMD)
---

> A new CPU Manager Static Policy Option called `prefer-align-cpus-by-uncorecache` was introduced in Kubernetes v1.32 as an alpha feature and has graduated to beta in Kubernetes v1.34. This new CPU Manager Policy Option is designed to optimize performance for specific workloads running on processors with a split uncore cache architecture.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A new CPU Manager Static Policy Option called `prefer-align-cpus-by-uncorecache` was introduced in Kubernetes v1.32 as an alpha feature, and has graduated to **beta** in Kubernetes v1.34.
This CPU Manager Policy Option is designed to optimize performance for specific workloads running on processors with a _split uncore cache_ architecture.
In this article, I'll explain what that means and why it's useful.
```

![architecture_diagram](./mono_vs_split_uncore.png)

### Benefit of the feature
The matrix below shows the [cpu-to-cpu latency](https://github.com/nviennot/core-to-core-latency) measured in nanoseconds (lower is better) when passing a packet between CPUs via its cache coherence protocol on a split uncore cache processor. In this example, the processor consists of 2 uncore caches. Each uncore cache consists of 8 CPUs.
![cpu_to_cpu_latency](./c2c_latency.png)
Blue entries in the matrix represent latency between CPUs sharing the same uncore cache, while grey entries indicate latency between CPUs corresponding to different uncore caches. Latency between CPUs that correspond to different caches are higher than the latency between CPUs that belong to the same cache.

> With `prefer-align-cpus-by-uncorecache` enabled, the static CPU Manager will allocate CPU resources for a container such that all CPUs assigned to a container share the same uncore cache. This policy operates on a best-effort basis, aiming to minimize the distribution of a container's CPU resources across uncore caches, based on the container's requirements and allocatable resources on the node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With `prefer-align-cpus-by-uncorecache` enabled, the
[static CPU Manager](/docs/concepts/policy/node-resource-managers/#static-policy) attempts to allocates CPU resources for a container, such that all CPUs assigned to a container share the same uncore cache.
This policy operates on a best-effort basis, aiming to minimize the distribution of a container's CPU resources across uncore caches, based on the
container's requirements, and accounting for allocatable resources on the node.
```

> By concentrating CPU resources within a single or minimal number of uncore cahes, applications running on processors with split uncore caches can benefit from reduced cache latency (as seen in the matrix above) and reduced contention against other workloads, resulting in higher throughput.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By running a workload, where it can, on a set of CPUS that use the smallest feasible number of uncore caches, applications benefit from reduced cache latency (as seen in the matrix above),
and from reduced contention against other workloads, which can result in overall higher throughput.
The benefit only shows up if your nodes use a split uncore cache topology for their processors.
```

The following diagram below illustrates uncore cache alignment when the feature is enabled.

> ![cache-align-diagram](./cache-align-diagram.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Diagram showing an example workload CPU assignment, default static policy, and with prefer-align-cpus-by-uncorecache](./cache-align-diagram.png)
```
This would also work better as SVG.

> In the Default Static Policy case, containers are assigned CPU resources in a packed methodology. As a result, Container 1 and Container 2 can experience a noisy neighbor impact due to cache access contention on Uncore Cache 0. Additionally, Container 2 will have CPUs distributed across both caches which can introduce a cross-cache latency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, Kubernetes does not account for uncore cache topology; containers are assigned CPU resources using a packed methodology.
As a result, Container 1 and Container 2 can experience a noisy neighbor impact due to
cache access contention on Uncore Cache 0. Additionally, Container 2 will have CPUs distributed across both caches which can introduce a cross-cache latency.
```

With `prefer-align-cpus-by-uncorecache` enabled, each container is isolated on an individual cache. This resolves the cache contention between the containers and minimizes the cache latency for the CPUs being utilized.

## Use cases
Common use cases can include telco applications like vRAN, Mobile Packet Core, and Firewalls. It's important to note that the optimization provided by `prefer-align-cpus-by-uncorecache` can be dependent on the workload. For example, applications that are memory bandwidth bound may not benefit from uncore cache alignment, as utilizing more uncore caches can increase memory bandwidth access.  

## Enabling the feature
To enable this feature, set the CPU Manager Policy to `static` and enable the CPU Manager Policy Options with `prefer-align-cpus-by-uncorecache`.

> For version 1.34, the feature is in the beta stage and will require `CPUManagerPolicyBetaOptions` to also be enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Kubernetes 1.34, the feature is in the beta stage and requires the `CPUManagerPolicyBetaOptions` 
[feature gate](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/) to also be enabled.
```

Append the following to the kubelet configuration file:
```yaml
kind: KubeletConfiguration
apiVersion: kubelet.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
featureGates:
  ...
  CPUManagerPolicyBetaOptions: true
cpuManagerPolicy: "static"
cpuManagerPolicyOptions:
  prefer-align-cpus-by-uncorecache: "true"
reservedSystemCPUs: "0"
...
```

> Remove the `cpu_manager_state` file and restart kubelet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

If you're making this change to an existing node, remove the `cpu_manager_state` file and then restart kubelet.
```

`prefer-align-cpus-by-uncorecache` can be enabled on nodes with a monolithic uncore cache processor. The feature will mimic a best-effort socket alignment effect and will pack CPU resources on the socket similar to the default static CPU Manager policy.

## Further reading

> Please see [Node Resource Managers](/content/en/docs/concepts/policy/node-resource-managers.md) to learn more about the CPU Manager and the available Policy Options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See [Node Resource Managers](/docs/concepts/policy/node-resource-managers/) to learn more about the CPU Manager and the available policies.
```
